All right so let's talk about exceptions
which occur during the initialization
of a class or an object.
So we need to create a new class in our exceptions project.
I'm gonna call it InitializerExceptions.
So in this code, we've got a class StaticTest
that's got two static fields,
and it's also got a Static Initializer
as you can see there.
Now I've introduced an error in that Static Initializer.
Now the class InitializerExceptions as we move down
just tries to print the currentMessage of StaticTest.
So the current obviously compiles.
No errors, but if we run it,
we got a java.lang.ExceptionInInitializerError.
So you might be thinking that we can fix it
in our main method with a try catch.
So let's replace our main method
with some code to test out.
So you now can see what we've done there
is we've wrapped it in a try catch, catching Exception,
and if we run this, we actually get the same thing,
ExceptionInInitializerError.
If an exception occurs in a static initializer,
the Java virtual machine cannot recover from it.
The Static Initializer needs to handle the situation itself.
So we're gonna undo that last change.
So we'll go back to our original main method
as it looks like there,
and let's go ahead and change the Static Initializer,
and we'll get it to resolve the error itself.
So I'm got to replace the code for the Static Initializer.
You can see we've introduced a try
and a finally as well there now,
and no compile errors.
We can run this,
but again, we've got an exception in initializer error.
So that also fails.
A finally clause is always executed,
but if a new exception is not created
in the finally clause,
the Java Virtual Machine still looks for the calling method
to handle the exception, which does not happen here.
Now this is true of any finally clause,
not just one in a static initializer method.
The Java Virtual Machine won't initialise the class
with the exception thrown
even though we now have a finally clause.
So can we catch and fix the exception?
So I'm gonna change the code again.
Basically we're gonna add a catch
to the existing code,
to see we've now got a try catch
and still got the finally.
If we run this, the code compiled obviously
and now executes, so that confirms
that you can use try catch in your Static Initializer,
and we resolve the problem by doing that.
All right, but moving on from there,
what happens if we throw an exception
in the catch clause here,
and below the output I'm just gonna throw
an exception there.
Now you can see that it results straight away
in an compiler error, unhandled exception
java.lang.Exception.
The reason Exception is a checked Exception,
so let's change that instead to a RuntimeException.
The error has now disappeared as you can see,
but if we run the code,
compiled okay obviously,
but we're back to a same problem we had earlier,
java.lang.ExceptionInInitializerError.
The rules for checked, unchecked exceptions
still hold true for Static Initializers,
but you'll notice that for your Static Initializer
you can't declare a throws clause,
so therefore you must handle a checked exception
that occurs in a Static Initializer.
So let's remove the throw statement,
and we're back to code that compiles
obviously, but also runs.
All right so that's Static Initializers.
Let's now look at regular initializers,
and we're gonna add some code
to our initializer exception class.
We're gonna create a regular initializer,
and I'm gonna accept that import,
and we have a look at the error
it's the familiar Unhandled exception java.io Exception,
but how do we handle that here.
Now we could handle it with an enclosing try, catch plug
as we did with the Static Initializer,
but for an instance initializer,
we've also got another option.
Since the instance initializer code is executed
in the constructor method,
we can instead add a throws declaration to the constructor.
So let's have a look at that.
I'm gonna add the constructor below this.
Now you can see soon as I've done that,
the errors disappeared.
So the code obviously compiles and runs,
but we're not doing at the moment
is testing the constructor.
So let's actually add the segment of code
after the last statement in the main method down here
to actually test out our constructor.
Let's now run the code,
and we can we've actually got it clear in the error,
whoops and obviously the whoops comes
from our instance initializer block.
All right, so let's add another constructor
that's got to tell one parameter of top string.
We'll upload the existing initializer,
the existing constructor rather.
This code causes a compiler error.
Unhandled exception again, if your instance initializer
throws an unchecked exception,
every constructor in your class must declare
the exception in its throw declaration.
So let's verify the statement.
So maybe you think you can just add
a try catch in the constructor
and then that should work since the initializer
is executed as part of the constructor.
So let's try that.
I'm gonna paste that into our second constructor.
So we've fixed one compiler error
on the constructor declaration,
but we've got another one indicating
that an IOException is never thrown in the try block.
The instance initializer code will be executed
before the try catch block we've just created,
and not be wrapped in the try block as a result.
The only way to get your code to compile
is to have every constructor declare
the exception in its throw clause.
So I'm gonna remove this second constructor in our code.
All right so what's the impact of having a constructor
declare an exception in this throw clause?
Well let's explore that.
So what we're gonna do is create a nested SubClass
named subclass which extends our current class,
and we're gonna paste that
in our initializer exceptions class,
and you can see that straight away
that results in a compiler error
indicating that this SubClass has
an unhandled exception IOException.
Now we didn't create the constructor for our SubClass,
and therefore, the JVM implicitly creates
a no args constructor for us
which we'll just call super,
which does have the throws declaration.
So let's create our own constructor in SubClass.
So we've now got an error in our constructor,
unhandled exception again.
Let's add a super call to the constructor,
and you can see that our compiler error
has now changed to the line that's on the super,
or that is the super statement.
Same error again, so if we change our code one more time
by wrapping it in a try catch,
we've still got a problem with the code.
What's wrong with this code?
If we hover over super,
call to super must be the first statement
in the constructor body.
So unfortunately, super now is no longer considered
the first line of the constructor.
So we're caught between a rock and a hard place.
Our only solution is to create a no args constructor
that declares the same exception or a broader one
than your super classes constructor.
So if I replace the constructor,
the existing constructor code,
the error's now disappeared
and you can see we're now just throwing
the exceptions in our constructor.
All right so what have we learned about exceptions
in initializer statements?
Firstly, an unhandled exception in a static initializer
is fatal to the application,
checked or not checked, if the class is ever initialised.
A checked exception in a static initializer
is a compiler error that can only be caught and handled
by the static initializer code itself.
An unhandled exception in an instance initializer
is not fatal to the application.
A checked exception in an instance initializer
that is not caught and handled by the instance initializer
code itself is allowable
if and only if all constructors declare
the exception in their throws clauses.
A no args constructor with a throws declaration
that includes a checked exception
will cause trouble for any class that extends it
which does not also declare a no args constructor
that either throws the same exception or a broader one.
All right so that's the end of this video.
You got some quiz questions coming up for exception handling
and then we'll move onto section 12 understanding modules.
See you in the next section.